projects/teak-deck.md, before:

# Teak Deck on Ramp Door

[Back to Overview](../README.md)

- Time: A few hours effort
- Money: ~300$

## Goal
Non-slip, barefoot-friendly ramp surface that doesn't burn your feet when
exposed to the sun.

## Materials

- [Floor mat](https://www.amazon.com/OCEANBROAD-Self-Adhesive-Flooring-Non-Slip-MotorBoats/dp/B0BR9WQ9ML?tag=rvlifehacks-20)
- [Primer](https://www.amazon.com/3M-3M23929-94-Primer-Quarts/dp/B07L8KMHVX?tag=rvlifehacks-20)
- 4-6" Roller from Home Depot

## Process
- Leave teak mat rolled out flat in the sun for a few days to let the material
  shrink to avoid gaps. Leaving it rolled out will also make it easier to
  stick-and-peel since it won't curl up as much.
- Clean the ramp and make sure it's dry
- Apply Primer with small paint roller
- Self-adhesive teak mat
- Seal the edges with black or clear silicone

## Photos

<p>
  <img src="../assets/pics/thumbs/TeakDeck.jpg" width="45%">
  <img src="../assets/pics/thumbs/TeakDeckAndLEDHinges.jpg" width="45%">
</p>

## Notes
- Shrinking process sets in fairly quickly but give it a few days. We skipped
  that step and now have ~1/16" gaps - not terrible but avoidable.
- Holds up well to rain and sun
- Easy to hose down

[Back to Overview](../README.md)

Commit message:

Add Lippert Patio Railing Schematic

projects/teak-deck.md, after:

# Teak Deck on Ramp Door

[Back to Overview](../README.md)

- Time: A few hours effort
- Money: ~300$

## Goal

Non-slip, barefoot-friendly ramp surface that doesn't burn your feet when
exposed to the sun.

## Materials

- [Floor mat](https://www.amazon.com/OCEANBROAD-Self-Adhesive-Flooring-Non-Slip-MotorBoats/dp/B0BR9WQ9ML?tag=rvlifehacks-20)
- [Primer](https://www.amazon.com/3M-3M23929-94-Primer-Quarts/dp/B07L8KMHVX?tag=rvlifehacks-20)
- 4-6" Roller from Home Depot

## Process

- Leave teak mat rolled out flat in the sun for a few days to let the material
  shrink to avoid gaps. Leaving it rolled out will also make it easier to
  stick-and-peel since it won't curl up as much.
- Clean the ramp and make sure it's dry
- Apply Primer with small paint roller
- Self-adhesive teak mat
- Seal the edges with black or clear silicone

## Photos

<p>
  <img src="../assets/pics/thumbs/TeakDeck.jpg" width="45%">
  <img src="../assets/pics/thumbs/TeakDeckAndLEDHinges.jpg" width="45%">
</p>

## Notes

- Shrinking process sets in fairly quickly but give it a few days. We skipped
  that step and now have ~1/16" gaps - not terrible but avoidable.
- Holds up well to rain and sun
- Easy to hose down

For future reference the patio railing schematic. I needed to reorder some
railing feet and that's where I got the Lippert part number from.

<img src="../assets/lippert-patio-railing-schematic.jpg" width="45%">

[Back to Overview](../README.md)
